Welcome back in the previous videos we saw how to use someone D-3 is built in functionality to make
histograms.
In this video we'll take a similar approach with pie charts.
Pie charts are a valuable way to visualize data when you care about a part in relation to a whole.
You may recall that you can draw any circular arc with the SPG path element which is what we need in
order to draw a pie chart.
However while the path element is a powerful drawing tool it's also not the most intuitive.
Fortunately just as D-3 has a histogram method it also has a PI method to help transform data for visualization
as a pie chart.
Let's look at an example.
As usual.
Here are some links to the starter code will be working with here I've got the same set of data we use
for the histogram in the previous videos.
The only difference is that now I have counted the data tidy each region.
I'd like to use this data to display a pie chart for birth data by year.
I've already put some code into my apt.
Yes much of it should look similar to what we had for the histogram visualization.
I'm finding the first year in my data set picks and bounds on my SPG and filtering out any data that
isn't from the first year in my set.
Let me start by iterating through my data and generating a list of all the Continent codes.
I could do this using a reduce or even by inspection since there aren't many continents.
But for now I'll just write a quick for loop inside of the loop.
I'll use index of to check whether I've seen a continent or not.
If not I'll push it into my array.
Great now I'd also like to associate each continent a color.
I could use an object but this time around I'll use a D-3 scale to get the job done.
The scale I'll use this time is called the ordinal scale which basically maps a discrete set of points
in the domain to a discrete set of points in the range.
In this case my domain is the continent's array for the range.
I need an array of colors I could pick some colors out on my own.
But D-3 also comes with a few different color schemes that are designed to work with ordinal scales.
You can see a list of schemes in the D-3 documentation for scales for now since I know there aren't
many continents I'll use in category 10 which gives me an array of 10 colors.
Since there are fewer than 10 continents the extra colors simply won't get used by the scale.
Let's take a quick look here are my continence.
Here are my colors and as you can see the scale maps my first continent to my first color my second
continent to my second color and so on.
Cool.
Before we dig into the D-3 help our methods for pie charts.
I'd like to do one more bit of setup.
Typically pie charts are built inside of a group element which is transformed to wherever you want the
center of the pie chart to be.
If you don't do this the center of the pie chart will be the origin of the SPG which means you'll only
be able to see one quarter of it.
So first I'll select the Viji set it's within height then append to group transform it to the center
of the SPG and give it a class of chart so that I can easily select it later.
Now we're ready to learn about some new D-3 methods.
Like the histogram method we saw in the previous video there are a couple of help her methods we can
use to streamline the process of creating our pie chart.
The main difficulty lies in the fact that as we've seen patho elements in SVGA are complicated so we
need a way to translate between our original set of data and a string that we can pass into the attribute
of a path element D-3 facilitates this transition with the help of two methods.
The first is D-3 dot PI D-3 But pi is similar to d histogram in that it returns a function which takes
in a set of data and transforms that data into a format that's more useful for drawing the graph also
like the 3. got histogram.
The theory that pi has a value method that allows you to specify the value you're interested in visualize
like before we want to specify the birth's property and pass in the data for 1967
to understand what D-3 is doing.
Let's take a look at the value arcs as you can see.
I've got an array with four objects one for each arc in the pie chart each object has information about
the arc data points back to the data objects from our original birth data array that is bound to this
particular arc.
And angle is the angle where the arc should stop.
Index keeps track of the sort order of the arcs.
The default ordering is by value.
The larger the value the lower the index will talk about the padding.
In the next video starting is the angle where the arc should start.
Value is a value being graphed.
In this case the value is coming from the fact that you've reported that many births in 1967.
Note that the angles are always measured in radians which go from zero to two times Pi or around six
point to eight to PI Raney's is equivalent to 360 degrees both represent a full rotation.
In this example we see that the first two arcs should take up most of the area.
The last arc may not even be visible since its start and end angles are so close together as you can
see D-3 takes care of the work of translating our data into angle values that we can use to draw a chart.
But we're not quite there yet.
How do we get from these objects to a string that we can pass in as the D attribute to a path element.
Once again D-3 has got our backs.
It also comes with the arc method that translates these javascript objects into valid S.A.G. path commands.
Here's a quick example.
If I pass in an object within a radius of zero an outer radius of 100 a start angle of 0 and angle of
pi radians.
Here's the string the D-3 arc will return to me as you can see.
This is a valid string which I could pass in as the D attribute to some path.
It we can also use special methods on D-3 dark to set defaults for some of these object properties.
This can be helpful if for example you know that the inner and outer ready I will be the same for every
arc.
For instance here's how you can set a fixed inner and outer radius for D-3 arc based on the width of
the SPG.
Note that if you set the radius to zero you'll get a circle.
If you set it to some positive value you'll get an annulus or a donut shape.
I love donuts.
So I've got a positive in a radius.
We're almost there.
Now we need to use D-3 data method to bind our arcs to SVGA elements.
I've already created a group with a class chart.
So first I'll select this group and then I'll create an empty selection by selecting all elements with
a class of arke after joining with my.
I'll hop into the enter selection and for each arc I'll append a path with a class of arke I'll set
the field based on the continent give each arc a stroke color of black and lastly I'll set the D attribute
on the path by simply passing in my path function.
Remember that since path is a function it will be invoked once for each object in Arc's array and to
overturn a valid path command.
Now when we refresh the page we can see our graph.
We still don't have the range input working and there are some other enhancements we can make as well.
But this seems like a good place to pause.
We'll tackle these other features in the next video.
I'll see you there.